evaluation/README.md, before:

# Evaluation Experiments

This folder contains the ABS models and scripts which have been used to conduct
the experiments of the "Evaluation" chapter of my thesis.
For the instructions in this file, we assume the SDS-tool has already been
built, see the `README.md` file in the root of the SessionTypeABS source
repository.

The first three models of the evaluation chapter can be directly checked and
compiled with the SDS-tool without much effort. See section "Simple Models"
below.

For the more complex evaluations and performance measurements we employ python
scripts, see the section "Complex Experiments" of this file.

## Simple Models

### Grading System

You can compile and run the "Grading System" model like this:

```sh
cd models/simple/grading_system
../../../../sdstool compile GradingSystem.abs GradingSystem.st
gen/erl/run
```

If you want to test out, how often the invocation order of methods is violated
if dynamic enforcement is not applied, please see the subsection
`Grading System` in the `Complex Experiments` section of this file.


### Heap Communication Example

You can compile and run the "Heap Communication" example model like this:

```sh
cd models/simple/responsive_ui
../../../../sdstool compile ResponsiveUI.abs ResponsiveUI.st
gen/erl/run
```

If you want to test out, how the model behaves if the specified postconditions
are violated, please see the subsection
`Heap Communication Example` in the `Complex Experiments` section of this file.

### Notification Service Example

You can compile and run the "Notification Service" example model like this:

```sh
cd models/simple/notification_service
../../../../sdstool compile NotificationService.abs NotificationService.st
gen/erl/run
```

## Complex Experiments

We use python scripts to automatically alter ABS models and session types to
conduct the more complex experiments presented in the thesis.
We also use these scripts to collect data about the performance of a model.

Therefore, the following dependencies need to be installed to run these
experiments:

* Python 3.7
* pipenv 2018.11.26
* perf 5.3
* GNU time 1.9

For Arch Linux, you can run the following command to install these dependencies:
```sh
sudo pacman -S python python-pipenv perf time
```

Next, all necessary python dependencies need to be installed by running
```sh
pipenv install
```
in the `evaluation` folder.
You should ensure that all python files are executable:
```sh
chmod +x *.py
```

The experiments which conduct performance measurements will save the collected
data as `.csv` files in the `cache` subfolder of the experiment.
The content of these `.csv` files corresponds to the data tables in my thesis.
The plots created from this data can be found in the same subfolder as `.pdf`
files.

IF the experiments fail, you might have a different version of perf or GNU time
installed, or your system does not allow normal users to use perf.
You can test for the latter case by executing the following:

```sh
perf stat ls
```

If the command fails to collect and present measurements, you can try to execute
the following command as a super user to give normal users the permission to
use perf:

```sh
echo -1 > /proc/sys/kernel/perf_event_paranoid
```

Note, that you will need to delete the `cache` folder before you can rerun the
failed experiment.

### Grading System

If you run

```sh
pipenv run ./grading_system.py
```

the script will ask you, whether to enable the modifications necessary for
dynamic enforcement or not.
Next it will run the first example model of the thesis a 100 times and give
statistics, how often the invocation order intended by the session type has
been violated.

### Heap Communication Example

If you run

```sh
pipenv run ./responsive_ui.py
```

the script will ask you, whether some modifications should be applied to the
second example model of the thesis.
Depending on the chosen modification, the postconditions specified in the
session type are not fulfilled.
Next, the script compiles and runs the model.

### Performance Evaluation Example 1

The script `consecutive_calls.py` will conduct all experiments of phases I-III
of the first performance evaluation experiment of the thesis:

```sh
pipenv run ./consecutive_calls.py
```

This script can take some time.
The model template used for these experiments can be found in
`models/complex/consecutive_calls`.
To compute the `.csv` tables and `.pdf` plots mentioned above from the data
collected in this experiment, please run the following command next:

```sh
pipenv run ./view_consecutive_calls.py
```

You can find the resulting files in `models/complex/consecutive_calls/cache`.
The files are prefixed like this:

* Prefix of phase I:   Method2DirectNoShuffle
* Prefix of phase II:  Method2DirectNoShuffleAwait
* Prefix of phase III: Method2DirectReverseBusywait

If you want to run the experiments again, you have to delete this `cache` folder
first:

```sh
rm -r models/complex/consecutive_calls/cache
```

### Performance Evaluation Example 2

The script `notification_service_perf.py` will conduct all experiments of
the second performance evaluation experiment of the thesis:

```sh
pipenv run ./notification_service_perf.py
```

This script can take some time.
The model template used for these experiments can be found in
`models/complex/notification_service`.
To compute the `.csv` tables and `.pdf` plots mentioned above from the data
collected in this experiment, please run the following command next:

```sh
pipenv run ./view_notification_service_perf.py
```

You can find the resulting files in `models/complex/notification_service/cache`.
If you want to run the experiments again, you have to delete this `cache` folder
first:

```sh
rm -r models/complex/notification_service/cache
```

Commit message:

Fixed locale related error in evaluation scripts

evaluation/README.md, after:

# Evaluation Experiments

This folder contains the ABS models and scripts which have been used to conduct
the experiments of the "Evaluation" chapter of my thesis.
For the instructions in this file, we assume the SDS-tool has already been
built, see the `README.md` file in the root of the SessionTypeABS source
repository.

The first three models of the evaluation chapter can be directly checked and
compiled with the SDS-tool without much effort. See section "Simple Models"
below.

For the more complex evaluations and performance measurements we employ python
scripts, see the section "Complex Experiments" of this file.

## Simple Models

### Grading System

You can compile and run the "Grading System" model like this:

```sh
cd models/simple/grading_system
../../../../sdstool compile GradingSystem.abs GradingSystem.st
gen/erl/run
```

If you want to test out, how often the invocation order of methods is violated
if dynamic enforcement is not applied, please see the subsection
`Grading System` in the `Complex Experiments` section of this file.


### Heap Communication Example

You can compile and run the "Heap Communication" example model like this:

```sh
cd models/simple/responsive_ui
../../../../sdstool compile ResponsiveUI.abs ResponsiveUI.st
gen/erl/run
```

If you want to test out, how the model behaves if the specified postconditions
are violated, please see the subsection
`Heap Communication Example` in the `Complex Experiments` section of this file.

### Notification Service Example

You can compile and run the "Notification Service" example model like this:

```sh
cd models/simple/notification_service
../../../../sdstool compile NotificationService.abs NotificationService.st
gen/erl/run
```

## Complex Experiments

We use python scripts to automatically alter ABS models and session types to
conduct the more complex experiments presented in the thesis.
We also use these scripts to collect data about the performance of a model.

Therefore, the following dependencies need to be installed to run these
experiments:

* Python 3.7
* pipenv 2018.11.26
* perf 5.3
* GNU time 1.9

For Arch Linux, you can run the following command to install these dependencies:
```sh
sudo pacman -S python python-pipenv perf time
```

Next, all necessary python dependencies need to be installed by running
```sh
pipenv install
```
in the `evaluation` folder.
You should ensure that all python files are executable:
```sh
chmod +x *.py
```

The experiments which conduct performance measurements will save the collected
data as `.csv` files in the `cache` subfolder of the experiment.
The content of these `.csv` files corresponds to the data tables in my thesis.
The plots created from this data can be found in the same subfolder as `.pdf`
files.

### Troubleshooting

IF the experiments fail, you might have a different version of perf or GNU time
installed, or your system does not allow normal users to use perf.
You can test for the latter case by executing the following:

```sh
perf stat ls
```

If the command fails to collect and present measurements, you can try to execute
the following command as a super user to give normal users the permission to
use perf:

```sh
echo -1 > /proc/sys/kernel/perf_event_paranoid
```

Note, that you will need to delete the `cache` folder before you can rerun the
failed experiment.

There has also been one case, where the scripts could'nt read the output of
perf since its output was formatted differently due to locale settings.

### Grading System

If you run

```sh
pipenv run ./grading_system.py
```

the script will ask you, whether to enable the modifications necessary for
dynamic enforcement or not.
Next it will run the first example model of the thesis a 100 times and give
statistics, how often the invocation order intended by the session type has
been violated.

### Heap Communication Example

If you run

```sh
pipenv run ./responsive_ui.py
```

the script will ask you, whether some modifications should be applied to the
second example model of the thesis.
Depending on the chosen modification, the postconditions specified in the
session type are not fulfilled.
Next, the script compiles and runs the model.

### Performance Evaluation Example 1

The script `consecutive_calls.py` will conduct all experiments of phases I-III
of the first performance evaluation experiment of the thesis:

```sh
pipenv run ./consecutive_calls.py
```

This script can take some time.
The model template used for these experiments can be found in
`models/complex/consecutive_calls`.
To compute the `.csv` tables and `.pdf` plots mentioned above from the data
collected in this experiment, please run the following command next:

```sh
pipenv run ./view_consecutive_calls.py
```

You can find the resulting files in `models/complex/consecutive_calls/cache`.
The files are prefixed like this:

* Prefix of phase I:   Method2DirectNoShuffle
* Prefix of phase II:  Method2DirectNoShuffleAwait
* Prefix of phase III: Method2DirectReverseBusywait

If you want to run the experiments again, you have to delete this `cache` folder
first:

```sh
rm -r models/complex/consecutive_calls/cache
```

### Performance Evaluation Example 2

The script `notification_service_perf.py` will conduct all experiments of
the second performance evaluation experiment of the thesis:

```sh
pipenv run ./notification_service_perf.py
```

This script can take some time.
The model template used for these experiments can be found in
`models/complex/notification_service`.
To compute the `.csv` tables and `.pdf` plots mentioned above from the data
collected in this experiment, please run the following command next:

```sh
pipenv run ./view_notification_service_perf.py
```

You can find the resulting files in `models/complex/notification_service/cache`.
If you want to run the experiments again, you have to delete this `cache` folder
first:

```sh
rm -r models/complex/notification_service/cache
```
